Okay, welcome back everyone. This is
lecture B3 of Cisco rethinking 2026.
Last time we had um done partial pooling
and then we had done partial pooling
with multiple
features in a cluster. Right? So we this
is the Bangladesh data. I'll get back to
it in a second. And we looking in
districts and we're looking at the
effect of uh residents in a city or not
in a city. um and as that varies by
district. Uh and what we're going to do
today is allow those features to covary
across districts. And I'm going to show
you there's information that's been left
on the table for us that can improve
inference when we actually model the
covariance in the population. Um before
I get to that, I made a few slides
because someone asked a question uh in a
previous lecture, I forget who it was,
apologies, about effective sample size,
which I sometimes call number of
effective samples. those sound the same
to me but not to everybody. So I'm
trying to standardize on effective
sample size because that's what uh
oveter uses and so I'm just we should
standardize on something um or the ESS
uh and this is what if you if you run
the dashboard so on the development
branch of rethinking I'll push this out
to you guys live and as soon as I run
tests right it takes two hours to run
all the tests on my package. So uh uh so
that it says effective sample size now
for bulk which I'll explain what that
means in a moment. Um, so this is the
dashboard and this is for the model we
fixed last time that wasn't sampling
very well. I mean the the inferences are
good but it's it's a very inefficient
set of chains. Um,
and when you look at the in the upper
left plot the effective sample size in
the horizontal and R hat on the vertical
um all this variation in the same chains
across parameters and some of them doing
quite badly indeed. You'll see that one
in the upper left up there. Um and there
are lots of legitimate questions try to
understand what this means. There are
different ways uh to define effective
sample size exactly. Um but all of them
share that it's the number of draws you
take postwarmup draws you take. So in in
a chain like this it'll typically be
2,00 uh and it is in this example um
divided by the autocorrelation or some
measure of the autocorrelation of the
sequential samples. And I want to talk a
little bit about this because there was
a great question earlier and it it it
made me realize that I'm not, you know,
giving you good value on explaining what
this thing is. And it's a really
valuable first go diagnostic, right?
That's why it's the in the default
output in precy. It's a nice way to
catch problems with chain sampling. Now,
I want to tell you some nuance things
about it which you may or may not thank
me for afterwards, but this will be the
just like three slides and then we'll
get back into multi-level models. Um, I
promise you this is well I can't promise
you you'll like this but this is all
true what I'm about to tell you. No, and
it's good. This is this is the
experience section, the exposed section,
right? So you're uh I think you're
prepared to learn a little bit more.
Okay. What I want to get across is that
effective sample size depends on
multiple things. Um it depends upon the
parameter. Different parameters and
transformations of parameters will have
different uh effective sample sizes. So
you need to be very clear on what you
want to learn from the chain because the
chain can be fine even if some of the
parameters have bad effective sample
sizes if the target of inference is
good. You can get lucky but you need to
verify it. Um and just because and in
particular we're often interested uh uh
and especially in all the examples in
this course not in inference on
individual parameters usually but on
some function of multiple parameters
that is posterior predictions. So most
effect sizes or or treatment effect
estimate distributions are going to be
functions of multiple parameters in in
most modeling situations most realistic
modeling situations. And so you want to
know the effective sample size on those
transformations. So I I have this simple
example that I get from Aki um where we
have the world's simplest model. There's
no data. So I put it up on this. This is
the world's simplest Ul so to speak.
Well, I guess you can make one simpler,
but there are thousand dimensions in
this, but that's this is just showing
off how easy it is to sample stuff. Now,
um we're going to draw 2,000 samples uh
for a thousand normally distributed
variables theta. just a a vector of
length 10,00 and they're all 01 normals.
Okay, this is easy to sample from,
right? This I've rigged it for this is
the world's easiest multivariate
posterior to sample from and uh the
chain runs just fine. And I'm also doing
a transformation inside the chain to
just squaring each theta and and saving
that. Um and what happens here? Uh we're
going to compute compute the effective
sample size what's called the bulk which
is the default output in pricey uh um
and what's called the tail effective
sample size because I want to express
that too. The tail is the quantiles
right the the 5% 90 95% quantiles of the
distribution and and sometimes you can
you get a good effective sample size for
the bulk that is around the mean or the
median. um that's not exactly what bulk
means, but uh it's close to it. Uh but
you can't estimate the tails and
sometimes you can estimate the tails,
but you do worse in the bulk and it all
depends upon the parameter. I'm sorry I
like you can decide later if you want to
thank me for this information, but it's
it's just the truth, right? And we're
here for the truth. So we run this and
make a few plots for you. Um here we're
looking at uh this is all bulk uh ess
the default output and theta on the
horizontal and theta squared on the
vertical. Um look at the scales. Notice
the difference. Uh there are 2,000 draws
from the chains total. And you'll notice
for theta we're doing way better than
that. And this is because stan or in
particular Hamiltonian Monte Carlo has
very low sequential autocorrelation. In
fact it has negative sequential
autocorrelation. And that's what I'm
showing you in the upper right. This is
the autocorrelation plot for theta 1. So
remember there's a thousand of these and
I just picked one of them. But you can
run the code and look. I'm not cheating.
They've all got this negative
correlation structure where the first
bar uh is up and then the next one's
down. How is negative correlation good?
The you're exploring the posterior
faster when there's negative
autocorrelation. Not only it's better
than random.
Yeah.
Um and but now uh the square of theta is
awful.
Sorry, it's just how it goes. Um the
square of theta is is the absolute value
of theta would give you the same result.
This is effectively like the because the
scale isn't doesn't matter here for the
correlation. So it's just like once you
take the sign away, the fact that the
exploration is faster is because it's
going between negative and positive.
That's how the the negative
autocorrelation arises. But once you
take the absolute value of that, now
you're correlated.
Yeah. Doesn't that suck? Yeah. Okay. So,
you just got to be careful about what
you really want. If what you really want
is theta squared, then you should look
at the SS of theta squared. Okay. Yeah.
Question.
>> Does the sampling algorithm affect the
effective sample size or how is it
affected?
>> Yeah. Yeah, the sampling algorithm will
will will determine how the posterior is
explored and that'll determine the
autocorrelation series. Yeah,
absolutely. So what what you define the
posterior on which variables are in the
posterior space that's being explored
that's what Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
rather the nuts algorithm the no U-turn
sampling algorithm is going to try to
construct this negative thing for. Now,
even uh if you've got a posterior with a
lot of curvature, you're not going to be
able to get you're always going to have
low ESS. There's just no way around it.
Even with with no U-turn sampling, it's
just very hard to explore something
that's like a thin path. Uh it's just
hard to do. You can do it, but it just
takes longer and you're going to have
autocorrelation. There just no way
around that. Autocorrelation is not bad.
It just makes the chain less efficient.
Okay. It doesn't make it invalid. Yeah,
it's just this effect, but it affects
it's the main thing that affects ESS,
which is why I'm talking about it here.
Does this make sense? I don't want to
spend too much time on this. This isn't
an awful thing, but it's just keeps you
uh as experienced folks from saying
naive things about how good your chains
are. Um the other thing is is to think
about bulk versus tail. You can also
compute the ESS for any quantile of
interest. And just because the bulk is
good um doesn't mean that the tail is
good. And just because the bulk is bad
doesn't mean the tail is bad. So here's
a case on the left. I've got theta with
bulk on the horizontal and the tail ESS
on the vertical. Tail ESS is defined as
the minimum of the 5% 95% quantiles. So
you imagine that's your target of
inference is a is a credible interval.
So you care about the tails of the
posterior. then the tail ESS is the
thing to pay attention to. Yeah. Um and
there there may be cases like that.
Often we want the mean. Uh but the the
bulk isn't exactly that, but it's giving
you good information about the quality
of the estimate of the mean. Um so for
ESS bulk for theta, I want you to see
that the numbers on the horizontal axis
are much bigger than the numbers on the
vertical. And that's very common. It's
estimating um the shape of the tail
needs more samples. You can just run
these chains longer and and get more
samples for the for the tail. These are
all really good ESS's, by the way.
Plenty good for most things. These are
in the thousands. Um, theta squared uh
is different. Bulk is lower, but
sometimes tail is higher than the bulk.
Okay, you're welcome.
Um, uh, take some time and you could
play with this. Uh, there's nothing to
be alarmed about here. It's just I don't
want you to think that only one ESS
calculation for any old parameter is
sufficient. You need to be very clear as
always what your estim
and do do the proper diagnostic on the
on the estim. Yeah. And that's the kind
of thing that you know if if you get me
as a reviewer, god forbid,
that's what I'm going to be looking for.
It's like, yeah, you told me like none
of your R hats are this, but I want to
know what the ESS is on the
transformation that you're making
inferences on, right, on your effect
size. Okay. Um, let's pivot. Um,
so we're going to come down to
correlated effects. So one way you can
think about uh multi-level modeling is
in in the simplest world if we have
these vectors of alphas and betas
different features we want to estimate
we can just give them independent uh
fixed priors. Yeah, this kind of model,
a fixed effects model, very effective.
Sometimes it's the best model. We'll
come to that hopefully next lecture when
I have some time. Um, already a very
exciting thing. Yes. Does anybody know
this meme? My memes are so dank. I'm not
sure anybody remembers these things
anymore. Okay. Um, what we've done so
far is we've done partial pooling. Right
now, we're getting excited. This is
pretty good. uh partial pooling gives us
better estimates at the at the unit
level by borrowing strength from the
whole population.
Sometimes also we want to estimate
variance components. So here we get
posterior distributions for sigma and
tao which are variance components in the
population. Good. But we can do better
and this is what we're going to do today
is uh we're going to take alpha and beta
and put them in the same population
distribution and and model the
co-variance between them across
clusters. And this is what would be
called a varying slopes model or there
are other names for it but I'll call it
a varying slopes model or varying
correlated varying effects something
like that. So that's the goal. We're
going to persist with this Bangladesh
data set uh to try and try and keep
things coherent just to remind you where
we were in the workflow of this. This is
the core basian workflow u without all
the little diagnostics and misadventures
that actually happen in your full
workflow but I'll try to talk about
those uh those details as we go. We've
got our generative model which is this
structural model plus distributional
assumptions. Um we got this est demand
that we're driving towards the effect of
urban living on contraceptive use um
stratified by district and uh we're had
this plan from last lecture. We're going
to build our way up through scaffolding
to the target um by building models
incrementally engineering one feature at
a time so that we can and then we're
going to use these models to compare
them so we understand the models better
and we understand the final inferences
better. So we had gotten to statistical
model two last time and now we want to
do statistical model 3. Now I just
remind you this is where we had gotten
to in the posterior predictions. We have
these partially pulled predictions
for uh rural living uh moms uh women.
Some of them don't have any kids. Women
in uh by district in the sample and
urban women and women by district uh in
the sample. And you'll you'll see
overall uh more contraceptive use in the
urban areas, right? But there's more
structure here. This is where I ended I
think last time. There's um some
co-variance between at the district
level. Uh part ofly this is because in
the scatter plot on the right uh the
parameter A is used in both axes. So
it's not surprising there's some
correlation. But there's something
deeper happening here as well that there
really is covarying structure that the
effect of urban living varies by
district and that how much it varies is
associated with the base rate level of
contraceptive use in the rural parts of
that district. And that's what we're
going to drive towards estimating today.
There'll be more cases where I'll say
that. I know that's that's it's a
complicated kind of statement. Um to
remind you when we do model expansion
with multi-level models uh two main
directions of expansion are adding more
clusters which uh here we have districts
and that's the only kind of cluster
we've got in this data set but we could
add things like extended families or if
we had particular towns those would be
clusters as well. Um and then we have
features which are things about the
districts uh that we want to model
simultaneously and those features may
covary across districts. Districts that
are high in one may be high in the other
and that information can be useful for
partial pooling because it lets us do
partial pooling across the features.
Yeah, we'll get to this as we go.
And then of course sometimes that
correlation is the target of your
inference. Just like sometimes you want
to estimate variance components,
sometimes you want to estimate
covariance components.
Uh one example of this that'll come up
later on when we do social networks is
reciprocity is the co-variance in
behavior within diads,
right? It's the correlation and say so
uh people who study primates study
grooming networks. If you ever watch
monkeys, they mainly sit around and
groom a lot. Yeah. Lots of ticks out
there. Yeah. And uh so the amount of
grooming within diads uh the correlation
in that is often called reciprocity. And
that's a that's a target of inference
that we want to do. I'm sure you can
imagine in human social networks similar
things. We don't usually pick ticks off
of one another. Um but I mean
historically we certainly did, right? I
mean uh anybody who's had kids in
Germany knows about head lice. Sorry,
it's just true. Germany is a vast bed
teeming with lice. It's just lice
everywhere. I'm doing great tourist
advertisement for this country, right?
It's a lovely place to come. Everybody
come to Germany, but you will get lice
and it's okay. There's a shampoo. But
anyway, so uh the reciprocity in picking
off lice. Uh that's a coariance target.
Okay, I should stop talking about that
and advance the slide, shouldn't I?
Okay, so how do we engineer this? As as
always, I want to give you a
subworkflow. Um, you know, we've got the
full workflow and then we have a
subworkflow for each model type to help
us engineer modify a previous simple
model. Uh, when we add correlated
features, we take the prior
distributions for each feature and we
put them in a common multivariate
distribution. When you have one feature,
you have a one-dimensional distribution.
when you have two features and in this
example that's going to be uh rate of
contraceptive use in rural areas and
rate of contraceptive use in urban
areas. That's two features. Um we're
going to put them in a two-dimensional
distribution and we're going to model
their co-variance. If you have in
features you can just keep expanding.
Now at some point the scaling hits you
and the model gets really slow but
actually these days you it can get
pretty big before you get impacted that
way. Um but in in principle you can have
in-dimensional distributions.
Um learning the correlations requires
more data. Uh and and sometimes you
won't be able to learn them but we're
going to talk about when I get later on
in the workflow a kind of plot you can
make to assess that like looking
comparing the posterior to the prior
basically to see how much you've
learned. Um so this is the model you saw
last time. Uh this is not a a a
co-varying effects model simply a
varying effects model with independent
alphas and betas. Remember this from
last time. Yeah. Um and we had run this
model and found that it sampled
inefficiently and so actually there was
another version of it which was the
non-entered version. Remember this
nonsense? Yeah. That's where we got
before. Okay. Um, and to remind you the
difference this makes, uh, the centered
version, which is easier to read, uh, it
gives you valid inferences, but the
chains are more inefficient or quite
inefficient. That's what you see on the
left here, uh, the ESS and for the 2,00
samples we draw for Tao, which is one of
the variance effects for the for the
slopes, it was 29. That's bad. Okay. Um,
and when we do it non-entered, uh, it
samples much much better. Uh let's think
about the prior in this model. Um so if
we think about uh the alphas and the
betas and we center them. So we subtract
the alpha bar from them so that on the
graph on the right they're both centered
at zero. Yeah. Uh then since these are
independent we've just got this Gaussian
hill. You imagine you're looking down on
top of a hill. It's like for those of
you who live here in Leipzig, you know
there's that old rubble hill that's in
the south of town towards going towards
Conowits. It's actually just World War
II rubble that's been piled up with
dirt. What's it called?
>> Fuckerberg.
>> Yeah, the fuckerberg. Yeah, exactly.
It's great view of the city. It's just
rubble under you. Right. Lot every
German city's got one of these, I think.
And um the Crotsburg in Berlin is the
same is the same kind of thing. And uh
so this is what you're looking at. This
is more regular. But uh since they're
independent, it's just a symmetrical
Gaussian hill. Yeah. Or if we take the
log of it, it's a bowl, right? It's a
it's a parabolic bowl in the log space
because Gaussian distributions are
parabas in the log space. I shouldn't
have said that. Some of you were looking
at me confused. That's true. For me,
that's just normal. It's like reading
the matrix or whatever. But you see
distributions in the log space. But um
when we this is the prior. So this is
not an assumption that this doesn't in
the posterior distribution the alphas
and betas could still have a
correlation. In fact, I showed you they
did on the previous slide, right? or or
two slides ago rather more than two
slides ago some number of slides ago on
this slide they are correlated at least
the the pred the posterior predictions
are correlated but in the prior they're
not um so the question is and and this
is just like uh at the at the level of
the data model or the likelihood there's
no correlation assumed between among the
residuals across cases but the residuals
can still have correlation structure in
the posterior yeah but when we add a
parameter to model that correlation,
then we can do partial pooling in the
inference so you get extra strength out
of it. And that's what I want to show
you. What that means is we're going to
take these alphas and betas and we're
going to collapse them into a
two-dimensional multivariant normal. And
I'm going to step through the pieces of
this. Um, I know you've all seen
multivariant normals before, but the
notation here is is well, there are
multiple ways to do notation for
multivariant normals, and I've I've
factored out the correlation matrix. So,
I want to show you what that looks like.
Uh on the left here we've got the
features for the for some district J. So
what the way we want to think about this
we've got this population and we're
going to draw alphas and betas at the
same time right you sample districts and
you sample all their features together
and those features are have a
correlation structure. So like if alpha
is big maybe beta is also big but they
can also be negatively correlated so
that if alpha is big then beta tends to
be small. All right, but that depends
upon what we learn about the covariance.
Uh, then you've got a vector of means,
alpha and beta. That's the same as
before. Capital R, that's actually
supposed to be the Greek letter row, uh,
which looks like an R. Um, is the
correlation matrix and the size of that
depends upon the number of effects. This
is just a 2x two in this case. So
there's one parameter in there, one
correlation that needs to be modeled.
And then we have a vector of scales or
standard deviations. The correlation
matrix and the standard deviations
define a coariance matrix, right?
Because that's what you need. Yeah.
Question.
>> Yes. Alpha and beta bar are calculated
across the entire population within the
cluster.
>> They're across that that's the average
alpha in the population and beta is the
average slope in the population.
Yeah. Does this make some sense? Uh so
the idea is you're drawing alphas and
betas now from something. If I make
these positively correlated like in this
illustration, then uh you'll be drawing
from a hill that's oblong. Yeah. And
you'll tend to get uh high values with
high values and low values with low
values.
Yes. Okay. But we're going to learn that
from the data. Uh just just like we
learned the scales from the data. Um so
here back in the model um the new thing
that we have to do is define a prior for
a correlation matrix. Um and if you're
if you're a psychologically healthy
person that's not part of your life.
Priors on matrices are difficult things
to conceive of right because it's not a
single scalar value now you can think
about a distribution for it's a
distribution for a matrix which exists.
We have distributions for matrices and
statistics. Of course we do. Uh but it's
a funny thing to think about. There's a
number of options here in the literature
in this course. I'm going to push the
one that I use and I think there are
really good reasons to use it compared
to many of the more traditional options.
It's this LKJ family of correlation
matrix prior. LKJ are the first initials
of the authors of the paper that
proposed this. And
so just call it LKJ.
And uh in the simple case the 2x two
case there's one there's actually just a
prior being defined for one correlation
parameter in this and in that case the
marginal posterior shown in the upper
right here is just a beta distribution
actually defined between minus1 and one
instead of zero and one. It's like a
rescaled beta distribution. That's your
profile. And as you increase um the
parameter uh in in this prior it's
called ADA in the paper um you
concentrate probability mass towards a
correlation of zero.
Right? So low values uh are spreading
are allowing putting high probability
mass on on strong correlations whether
they're negative or positive and the
bigger that number is the more
regularizing there is uh in the
correlation prior. Um, so you can sample
random. This is a prior. So we can
sample from it. We can sample random
matrices. And what I've done in the in
the bottom right here is show you I
think that's the 90% uh confidence
ellipse for the multivariate
distribution sampling correlations
randomly. So each of those is a
different sample. And I'm show you that
it's totally random. You get small ones.
I'm also sampling the scales uh with
this so I can draw the whole coariance.
Yeah. Uh thing. The code for this is in
the scripts folder uh that I'll well
it's in the previous year. I'll make
sure I copy it to this year so it's easy
for you to find. It's easy to do to just
like draw the confidence ellipse for
this. Does this make some sense what I'm
doing? Um so we've got a prior
distribution that has no bias for
positive or negative. It's just all
over. But it it it does um very weakly
discourage strong correlations, but it
doesn't doesn't rule them out. You can
see I'm doing a very mild uh sort of
thing here. Yeah. question.
>> Why four?
>> Uh, I chose four because it has this
shape for the sake of the illustration.
I encourage you to play around with it.
Um, one of the things that happens when
you have a lot of features
is um necessarily now there's more
constraints on what a valid correlation
matrix is. So when there's just one
correlation, it can be anything between
minus1 and one. But as soon as you you
have like a a 3x3 or a 4x4 or a 10 x 10
now the whole matrix has to be positive
definite or to be valid. So one way to
think about that is um if if there are
there are three variables uh let's think
about it like three people and it's a
friendship network and the correlation
is is reciprocity or something like
that. Um if two of the people uh have a
really strong correlation in their
behavior uh and then and one of those
people has a strong correlation with the
third person then the second person and
the third person must also have a high
correlation. It's the only way you can
construct a valid matrix by the
definition of correlation. Does that
make sense? So they're not independent
anymore and you have to draw them as a
as a whole matrix. And what that does is
it means the only valid correlation
matrices in high dimension have way more
probability mass around zero.
Uh and this prior family LKJ takes all
that into account which is one of the
reasons I like it a lot. So I'm one of
the reasons I've chosen four is to kind
of prepare you for that idea that
concentrating mass around zero is not
only a good idea for regularization to
be skeptical of really strong
correlations and and make better
predictions in many cases but it's also
necessary in high dimensions because
only the only valid correlation matrices
will have this have this property. Yeah,
you'll you'll pile up um probability
mass on the diagonal basically is what
you do. Does that help? I don't know if
I answered your question but yeah. Okay.
Um,
right. Here's the code. Uh, I'll I'll
walk through this, so don't panic. U,
but but maybe you all are pros with this
nonsense by now. Once you implement try
to engineer the model, you've got
different ways to code it. So, I'm not
saying this is the only way to do it,
but this is the way that I like to do it
so that we can still express the linear
model the same way. That is the the
loget line, the second line of the
model. So first thing I want to show you
is how we define the multivariant
normal. And this is just straight
multivariate normal. I define a matrix
with 61 rows and two columns. 61 rows
because that's the number of districts
and two columns because there are two
features. The first column are the
alphas and the second column are the
betas. You see this matrix in your mind?
It's tall.
Yeah.
Okay. There's some nodding. I'm not sure
I've got you folks with me. But this is
the idea of what comes out of this
multivariant normal. You're drawing each
row and the correlation is in the is
across the columns. Yeah. Um if you had
more effects there would be more columns
and there would be correlations among
all the columns and that's what we're
modeling. Uh and then we have a bar
which is a vector uh with two parameters
in it. Uh capital row is the correlation
matrix. We'll get to that in a second.
And sigma is a vector. Now that contains
two parameters, two scale parameters.
Um
this code uh transpars is transforming
parameters. It's taking that matrix V
the elements in it and just copying them
into these vectors alpha and beta A and
B which is what we used before and we
want to use those in linear model now
for convenience. Otherwise, you could
just take V and do a bunch of subsetting
with brackets, but that's annoying.
Yeah. And it makes your code less
readable. And this is a this is a class
where I'm trying to teach you things and
not make things make the notation
difficult. So these transpar lines, they
seem superfluous, but they they make the
linear model the same as the previous
model. That's the point I want to say,
but it's not. You could just use the V's
in the linear model. Does this make
sense?
>> Um, say that again.
>> Yes.
Yeah. So transpars are just
transforming. I've just defined two
vectors of link 61 and I've named the
first one A. And then I just copy the
first column of the V matrix into it.
>> So those are the alphas.
And then I get to use A in the linear
model instead of
subsetting V. Otherwise I'd have to do V
district comma 1 when I wanted the
intercept and I'd have to do V district
comma 2 when I wanted the slope. And you
can do that. That's fine. But it makes
the code annoying because when you when
future you comes back to this and reads
your loget line, you're going to be what
was column one and what was column two,
right? And then in this code it it just
does housekeeping. This this doesn't
affect the sampling at all because these
are transformations of things you've
drawn from the chain. It doesn't
increase the dimensionality of the
model. They're transformed parameters
which are not sampled in the posterior.
Yeah.
And then uh Oh yeah, and here's the
linear model just with the A's, right?
So A for the DE district and B for the
de district
and then um here's our correlation
matrix. We define a correlation matrix
of dimension two. I've called it row and
it's got the its prior is this LKJ
correlation distribution. Okay.
Again remind you of the flow. Uh uh you
don't have to understand every part of
this right now. You just need to
understand enough to keep swimming.
then you can do really good modeling
work before you understand every piece
of this. That's normal. Everybody's like
that. So, just keep swimming and you'll
you'll gradually through uh experience
come to understand these things. Um
here's what the chains look like. The
summary, this is um effective sample
size against our hat. Uh these chains
are fine, but they're not super
efficient. In particular, sigma 2, which
is the the scale
parameter for the slopes, is not
sampling very efficiently, right? It's
effective sample. So, we we drew 2,000
samples and we're we've only got an
effective sample size of of 230 or so.
Uh, so you know what's about to happen.
I'm I'm sad and happy to report that
we're going to reparameterize this
model. And I I have to show you this
because this is this is a common thing
about engineering and getting
multi-level models to work is you want
correlated varying effects. And you can
do the same non-entering trick we did
before, but how do you desenter a
matrix, right? Which is what we're
thinking about. And the answer is
carefully. Yes, but it's totally
possible. And I'm just going to show you
how to do it. And then you can copy the
code. Um, and at some point you can come
back to this and really work through it
u by hand in an example and understand
why this works. Okay, here's the model
we just looked at with centered priors.
The the highlighted red line is the
population prior for the alphas and
betas. Yeah, multi two dimensional
multivariate distribution. For each
district, we draw two parameters and
we're modeling their correlation. We
want to re we want to factor out all the
parameters in that multivariant normal
so that we're back in normal 01 land.
That's what desentering would mean. So
how do we factor things out of there?
All the things out of there. Um I'm
going to show you the code and then I'll
explain it.
Okay, this is what it looks like. Uh
it's suddenly there's no multivariant
normal in the model.
Yay.
But it's there. it's lurking in the
algebra of this. And what's happened
instead now I have this matrix uh zed
that I've highlighted in red. Um and
every element of that every row j
remember and every um column k has the
same normal 01
distribution. So this is like before
when I defined those zcores in when I
desentered. We want we want all of these
priors to be normal 01 because that's
the easiest thing to sample from.
Yeah. Does that make some sense? So I've
done that. And then there's this other
stuff in particular the line right above
it. Um which reconstructs the the V
matrix that I had before.
Um the matrix where it has 61 rows and
two columns. that's reconstructed by the
line of linear algebra right above. And
I'm going to give you a little bit of
explanation for that. Um, you are
justified in being terrified by this
model. This is the kind of thing that
like rises from the ocean and scares you
and eats you and then proceeds to
destroy your town, right? It's it's a
very awful looking bit of code. Um, so
whatever emotional reaction you have to
it, uh, I share it. It's perfectly
justified. But we we conquer these
things one line at a time and understand
their functional bits, right? and how
they relate to one another. Um, so let's
do that. Let's dissect the monster. Uh,
here it is in Ulam code. And again, I'm
going to go through bits of this and
explain the pieces that we're interested
in. So here is the multivariate
population prior. All of these lines
define it together. These are the prior
distributions of the components. And I
want you to see is that these are
non-entered because there are no
parameters in on the right hand sides.
Yeah. Yay. This is going to make the
sampling good, right? So, we have that
matrix of zcores. We have alpha and beta
as before. We have u uh sigma which is
of length two here. Um and we have row
the the correlation matrix as before. um
we get the matrix of rescaled
uh varying effects back by using this
line of linear algebra. If we multiply a
diagonalized matrix of sigma, what does
that mean? Um it means in this case
there are two elements in sigma. It's a
vector of length 2. To create a diagonal
matrix from that, we make a 2x2 matrix
and we put the elements on the diagonal
and the off diagonal elements are zero.
That's a diagonalized matrix. This is
just a trick for making the
multiplication work. That's that's the
reason for it. You might reasonably ask
why would a sane person do this? And the
answer is to make the matrix
multiplication work. Yeah. And um then
we matrix multiply that by um this thing
called L, which I'll explain uh in in a
little bit when we get to the code. Um
and uh the matrix of zcores. And then we
transpose the whole thing.
Okay, those of you who had linear
algebra course at some point, you're
nodding like, "Yeah, good. I hated it,
but I understand." Those of you who
haven't, don't panic. Uh, matrix algebra
is a trick for notationally compressing
systems of equations. That's all it is.
So, there's no new math here. Actually,
there's just notation you're not
familiar with. Uh, but you understand
all the math that's involved. you know
how to take each element of Z that
corresponds to each district and how to
combine it, multiply it by its
appropriate scale parameter to get it
back on scale. The trick here is getting
the correlations filtered through in the
right way. And that's the hard part that
requires the this thing L that we're
talking about. Well, it doesn't require
it. There would be other ways to do it,
but this is the one of the more
computationally efficient ways to do it.
Um we've got uh uh the correlation
matrix now but it's defined in the code
on the left with this thing L. Uh not
directly on the correlation matrix row
but L of row. What is L? L is a thing
called a kleski factor. It's a way you
can factoriize a matrix. Any square
matrix can be factorized a number of
different ways. You can factor matrices
just like you can factor, you know, 10
into two and five, right? You could
factor a matrix too if sometimes for a
square matrix you can always factor it
into a kleski factor and if you take
that kleski factor and you multiply it
by its transpose you get the original uh
matrix back. Why do we want to do this?
Well, it turns out kleski factors are
really great for doing um mat uh matrix
multiplication to get correlation
structures in things. It's just a nice
computational technique. Um so that's
what we're using it here for.
And
uh when you run this model, I say way
more about this in the book by the way.
So when you look at the chapter in the
book, there's a uh there's a lot more
information about how this works. Um I
want to compare I want to show you what
this does for the sampling. This has a
really big impact on efficiency. In this
case,
the centered version of this model gives
you valid inference, right? It's fine.
You could get away with it. Uh but
you'll see there's there's been an order
of mag well not quite an order of
magnitude but there's you know you've
you've got a lot more efficiency on the
right. Look at the values in the uh
effective sample size plot on the left
versus the right. Yeah. And how how much
higher the uh typical effective sample
size is now. And that's very good. And
the effective sample size on the log
probability in the lower right is gone
up a lot as well. So sometimes to get
the model to work at all this is what
you have to do. There are going to be
cases where you just need this nonsense.
In that case, you can take the ulam code
or the stand code that it outputs and
just swap in the parts for your model,
but you can use that same you can just
manipulate that same block of
non-entered priors and it'll work in
your model as well. So you don't have to
invent it from scratch and don't try.
Yeah, you think when I do this stuff, I
just find my old model and I copy it and
I start. Right? That's the quick way to
do it. Okay, let's look at the posterior
distribution for the correlation
parameter. So on the left of this slide,
um I'm showing you the prior in black.
This was that LKJ prior. It's symmetric.
It very weakly. It's very weakly
skeptical of strong correlations, but if
there was, it doesn't make them zero,
right? That's important to realize. And
the posterior is um concentrated uh on
almost exclusively on negative values.
Yeah, there's a strong negative
correlation between the alphas and betas
for this sample in this model. I want to
look at the implications of that in a
second. And on the right, I'm showing
you the posterior means. Those are the
black dots uh for the alphas and betas.
Um so each of those points is a
district. Yeah. And the A is the log
odds of contraceptive use for a rural
living woman
and B is the offset from A for a woman
living uh in an urban place in the same
district and they're strongly negatively
correlated. Now start thinking about
this will be more entertaining for all
of us if you start thinking about what
that means and I'm going to show you
some more visualizations right as we go.
Um the pink hill beneath it is the is
the I say it's the population prior but
this is the population posterior right
because this has been the covariance and
the scale that is used to draw that hill
has been learned from the data. So this
is not the prior we put in because
remember the prior would take any
correlation. But now the the posterior
correlation is negative almost certainly
right? That's what the left tells you.
And so that's why it's a negatively
sloping hill so to speak. Does this make
some sense what we've done? Okay. Um
let's look at the previous model when we
didn't model the correlation between the
alphas and betas and again plot for each
district. uh the posterior mean for
alpha and beta and that's what I've done
on the left of this slide.
You see what has changed about the
inference across districts. By modeling
the co-variance, we've substantially
affected the distribution uh of the
alphas and betas across districts. Now
say why why is that true? Uh I think you
know in your heart and hopefully soon in
your mind uh why that's true. It's
because there's substantial imbalance in
sample size across districts uh in some
districts uh and there's imbalance in
sample size between urban and rural
women in the same district sometimes. So
you can think of situations where
there's a district where there are uh
very few urban women sampled, but the
model has learned from the total sample
that there's a negative correlation. And
now you're asking it to make a
prediction for a woman in an urban place
in a district where very few women have
been sampled for the urban area. And
then it uses the correlation to do
partial pooling. And so that moves the
beta for that district quite a lot.
That's what's driving this effect. And
it's learning because for some districts
there's very little evidence about what
urban women are doing or what rural
women are doing. Vice versa, depends
upon the district. Some districts you
have tons of data for both and then the
partial pooling doesn't do anything and
then those points sort of in the middle
are the same in these two models. But
for the more peripheral ones, they've
been partially pulled towards that
um uh negative sloping aclair shaped
thing. I don't know why we want to call
it short baguette whatever it is the uh
the the the negative correlation two
dimensional normal because of the
imbalance in sample size. Yeah. And the
partial pooling is trying to make better
predictions because of that. Does this
make sense? Yeah. If you've got tons of
data, you won't get any partial pooling.
You still might want to run a model like
this because the coariance is your
target. Yeah. You want to know the
correlation and then it's nice to have a
parameter for it.
>> Yeah. And then because you'll get a
posterior distribution, but it wouldn't
have much effect on the individual
estimates per district. Yes.
>> So if you would like
a fixed index model for both
coefficients with a ton of data, would
it look like this or like this?
>> It won't. It'll be different from both
of them because the one on the left
that's a great question. And I encourage
that kind of comparison. And I should
have done that here actually. So I'll
revi I'll make a note to myself to
revise this for next year. So that
that's in here. Um the pure fixed
effects model has no partial pooling.
The left here has partial pooling but
only in each direction. Uh only along
the horizontal and the vertical. Uh the
the betas are partially pulled among
themselves and the alphas are partially
pulled among themselves. What the right
has is partial pooling across the
features or the cases where there's more
evidence for one feature in a particular
district than the other feature informs
the other one that borrows strength
across the variables actually. And this
is the sort of thing you as a rational
mammal do in your daily life all the
time, which isn't an argument that
you're basian because you're almost
certainly not, right? Unless you're
crazy, but you might be approximately
basian because good decisions always
resemble basian updating, right? I'm
going to hold to that. I know there are
people who would scream at me for saying
that, but I'm going to hold to that. But
um uh but in real environments, you use
heristics, right? That's how animals
actually work in their environments.
They're not doing basine updating
exactly. But uh right so like if you
knew that um a person who
uh is on a keto diet also exercises a
lot. People know what keto diets are.
This used to be all the rage. Yeah. So
say in the population there's a
correlation between being on a keto diet
and having a gym membership and actually
going to the gym. Not just having the
membership, right? You know most
memberships like just sit there and
drain your bank account, right? that's
actually going. Then you meet someone
and you learn they're on a keto diet and
you're asked to predict whether they go
to the gym. You use that population
correlation to do it, right? These are
cross features. Uh yeah, does that make
did that help? Yeah, you do this
automatically all the time, right? It's
nice when your stat model is at least
half as smart as you, right? So that's
what we're trying to do with these
situations. Yes.
>> Can you rephrase this again
conceptually?
So I mean to get to this stage here we
are making
an
an empirical hypothesis or like we we we
look at our data or we before we look at
the data we are saying I think there's a
correlation between these two parameters
that we need to address.
>> That's one reason to do this model. The
other could be there might be a
correlation between them in the
population. And if there is, that will
give us better inferences for each
cluster.
Even if you're not interested in the
correlation, but if you're interested in
the correlation, then certainly you want
a model that has the correlation in it.
But you might want to just say maybe you
if there is one,
>> then you get to use the strength of that
information to make better inferences.
Yeah. Did that help?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Th those are two ways into this
madness.
>> Yeah. Two good justifications. With that
a hand.
>> And and if there wasn't a correlation,
you could still apply this and you would
see that the posterior was just like the
prior and then you could say there's no
correlation. Right.
>> Exactly.
>> Still apply just in case and you would
see from the posterior whether there is
or there isn't correlation.
>> That's right. Question was what if
there's no correlation? Well, then
you'll get inferences similar to the
previous model.
>> Yeah. And sometimes you just don't have
enough information in the data to
estimate the correlation. And and uh
yeah, and then you get the prior back,
which is why I like the plots like the
previous one where I plot the prior for
variance components and correlations. I
nearly always do one of these uh prior
posterior comparisons. Yeah. To check it
out. And sometimes you just can't learn
those those higher structure parameters.
Okay, let's move on. Um I've got five
more minutes here. So
um let's project this now thinking about
the workflow. We've got the posterior
distribution which are the raw estimates
but uh we don't want to know slopes. We
want to know the posterior prediction
for contraceptive use which is not a
slope.
Right? The posterior prediction for
contraceptive use for a woman living in
in an urban part of the her district is
a function of both alpha and beta.
Right.
Yeah. It's a trans it's a it's a
function it's the it's the inverse loget
of alpha plus beta right for that
district. So that's what I'm projecting.
Now these are the posterior means for
the model that doesn't have the
correlation in it right the uncorrelated
population model. Uh notice there's a
strong correlation. That's because
alpha's in both of them right. So it's
no wonder if you've got if you're
looking if you if you compute the
correlation of a variable and a function
of itself there will be a correlation
right usually unless the function is
time zero right other than that quite in
general this is important to come up by
the comes up by the way because
sometimes people publish papers and I
say sometimes I mean often where they
regress a variable on a function of
itself.
This is bad news. Yes, this happens a
lot in in various uh fields. I've seen
it in in economics papers where someone
will take something like actually it was
a migration paper was example I saw
recently where someone had um uh
immigration flow is the outcome variable
and on the right was something some
function that included it and resident
population. So uh like the inverse of it
on the right hand side and the idea is
you're doing like proportion or
something like that and lo and behold
the the slope of that is negative. Yeah.
But that's a necessary feature of
regressing a variable on its inverse is
that the slope will be negative. Right?
You've learned nothing except that your
regression is misspecified. Yeah. So you
want to be careful about this sort of
thing. In this case we've done nothing
wrong. It's just like you shouldn't be
surprised there's a positive correlation
because alpha and alpha plus beta are
correlated.
Yeah. Does that make sense? Well, I want
to show you what happens now uh when we
put the posterior means for the
correlation model. Um the this
correlation is actually reduced because
the alphas and betas are negatively
correlated in the posterior. What does
that mean? Let's back up to the previous
slide and think about uh the right here.
What you're look on the left. So
districts that have big alphas have high
contraceptive use in rural parts of the
district.
Those districts have smaller betas
closer to zero, sometimes slightly below
zero, which means that the cities in
those districts are more similar to the
rural areas. I'm going to say that
again. Rural areas with high
contraceptive use, the rural areas are
like the cities.
Yeah. In a typical district which has a
low rate of contraceptive use, the
cities are really different.
Cities have high contraceptive use in
Bangladesh in 1989. Some rural areas do,
but for some districts, the rural areas
also have high contraceptive use. And
that's this negative correlation. And
taking account of that gives us quite
different posterior predictions,
especially for some of the districts
which have lower sample sizes in this
example.
Does that is that cool? That's cool. I
assert it's cool.
Yes, but you projecting to the
observation space like in this graph is
the destination. This is this is a very
important destination in the workflow is
not to stop at the parameters but to
push into the outcome space because this
is the observable stuff uh the
behavioral level. Okay, does this make
sense? All right, we are right on time
for once. It's amazing.
Okay, let me try to summarize. I've just
got two more slides. This is all I
planned for. Uh so first correlative
varying effects um really important kind
of default model to use when you when
you've got multiple features and you
want to do partial pooling. What they
mean structurally is we engineer a prior
that learns a correlation structure not
just the scales uh the the scale that is
the variance across clusters but also
the correlation across features across
clusters. I know the grammar there is
annoying but I think you know what I
mean. Yeah. Um, you might do this uh uh
because you're interested in the
correlations themselves or you might do
it just because you want better
estimates at the cluster level. Yeah.
And the way I think about this, there's
some annoying engineering to do here.
There the the the model can be quite
complicated, but at least for me in my
philosophy of applied statistics,
there's an e ethical obligation to do
difficult things even if it makes no
difference. And often it will make no
difference. I'm here to tell you, I'm
not going to lie to you. Sometimes you
will put in this extra hour or two or
three of work to do the damn model
Richard encouraged in lecture and you'll
get exactly the same inference, but you
did the right thing.
Does that make sense? Right? We don't do
the right thing because it makes a
difference. We do it because it's the
right thing. Right? Sometimes it will
make a difference, but you're not going
to know that unless you try it. I'm
sorry to say, right? But this is a
profession. I'm going to sermonize for a
moment. Just allow me. My son is used to
this, right? And you're not my kids, but
there's a professions
thrive upon a sense of ethics. And it
what you don't want to put yourself in
his position of someone saying um uh did
you do the the coariance model for this?
And you and and being forced to say,
"Yeah, I thought about it. Um but you
know, that was a lot of work and I
decided not to do it." This is a job,
damn it. Like we do what's right. Yeah.
Am I being too strict here? I think
that's just what it is. If you're an
applied statistician, you do the hard
thing. Um uh even if it turns out not to
make a difference, sometimes it will. Uh
and that brings me to the last thing I
want to say today, uh is about workflow.
Doing the hard thing doesn't mean doing
it first.
Yeah. Because it's very difficult to
engineer the full target model you want
to get to for inference on the first go.
So you want to think about uh some set
of models that scaffold you up to that
not just because it makes the
engineering easier and it catches
mistakes and gives you more more
confidence in your results but also
because you'll understand the final
model more by comparing it to the subm
models and that's what we've done in
this exercise with the Bangladesh data.
There were actually six models not three
that we fit because for each of them I
did centered and non-entered. Uh, and
that's often the case too for a
particular data set. You won't know
whether the centered or non-entered
model samples better. I'm sorry.
Sometimes the centered model's better.
Um, uh, there are good reasons for that
I can maybe bring up in a later lecture.
Uh, but it's important to think about
the workflow in terms of a a subworkflow
in the modeling, a path of modeling that
engineers one feature at a time and
takes you up to your target estim. But
don't try to do that on the first go.
Maybe you think uh you're going to get
lucky. Uh trust me, I've been doing this
for 20 years. It's very hard to get
lucky on the first go for a complicated
model. Sometimes I will even for for
complicated features like these
functional spaces you were working on.
Um those of you at home, I'm pointing at
someone in the audience. Um I'll have a
model that only has that and I'll get
that working and then I'll have some
other model where I have some other
complicated feature working and then
I'll merge them.
Right. But I'll try I'll engineer them
separately. And that's just trying to do
bug testing on synthetic data and get it
all to work so I have confidence. And
one of the reasons to do this I
apologize for the sermon. No, I don't I
don't apologize at all for this sermon.
One of the reasons to do that is chances
are you will be the only person who
reviews your code.
Yeah. Let's let's let's be honest about
that. If you get me as a reviewer, I
will review your code because I'm a
jerk. No, because that's my job, right?
I review code. I review the math
appendix. I review the code for papers.
But very few very few reviewers do. It's
an unpaid uh sort of job, right? Um so
it's important to have some kind of way
of working that engineers responsibly
and catches errors. And that's why I
keep coming back to these workflow
diagrams is to give you some sense of
that. Okay.
Sorry um or not sorry. Uh I hope there
was some value to this and when we come
in next time we're going to take this
machinery for modeling covariance and
different kinds of complicated
population priors and we're going to
apply it to different domains and do
special kinds of models. Everything
ranging from social networks to
phoggenetic regression will be examples
of these kinds of things. Okay. Uh I
look forward to it and I hope you do too
and have a good weekend.